JavascriptTemplates/javascript_templating_and_xss.md, before:

# Javascript Templating and XSS

## Agenda

* An XSS example
* Templates in JS/HTML
* Templates in Rails/JS
* A Note on sharing templates

## The XSS Attack
### What is XSS?
An XSS or Cross Site Scripting attack occurs when the attacker is able to insert custom strings into the page unfiltered.  In other words, the application developer mistakenly trusts some data as being safe to insert into the DOM.  
#### Trusting the query string
Let's look a simple XSS attack in query_string_xss.html.  
#### Trusting the database data
Let's look at a slightly more sophisticated attack in stored_data_xss/.  It's a Sinatra app so we'll have to start it up.

## Templates with Handlebars.js

We will be using handlebars as a templating system.  Read more about it at their website: [http://handlebarsjs.com/](http://handlebarsjs.com/)

It's a templating system analagous to ERB which has many of the same features.  Partials, conditionals, etc.

Handlebars templates can be brought into your javascript in three ways:

1. Write the templates inline in a script tag or other piece of the DOM.
2. Write the templates inline in a string.
2. Precompile the templates into javascript functions and include them via script tags.  In the context of Rails, a gem will do this for us automatically.  This is the best way.

To install the handlebars compiler at your shell:

`npm install handlebars@1.3 -g`

Then you can use it:

`handlebars <template>.handlebars -f <outputfile>.js`

The name of the template becomes the 

Let's look at  query_string_fixed.html

### Templating exercise

I'm going to quickly demo an XSS vulnerability on a working solution to LinkCheckerAjax.  If you finished, augment your solution with Handlebars.js templates inline in strings. If you didn't, just make it so something goes onto the page with a Handlebars template.

## Types of XSS
### Reflective
The attacker sends the victim to the application with an XSS attack in the victim's request.  The application reflects that XSS attack back to the victim, and the victim's browser executes it.
### Stored
The attacker inserts a payload into the application's database and the application replays it to the victim.
### Dom Based
The attacker modifies the DOM in a way that causes the application's javascript to go crazy and execute an attack.

## XSS in the Real World
* Through an Amazon book: [http://drwetter.eu/amazon/](http://drwetter.eu/amazon/)

   The book in question: [http://www.amazon.com/The-Web-Application-Hackers-Handbook/dp/1118026470](http://www.amazon.com/The-Web-Application-Hackers-Handbook/dp/1118026470)
* Facebook XSS through embedded rendered JS: [https://www.acunetix.com/websitesecurity/xss-facebook/](https://www.acunetix.com/websitesecurity/xss-facebook/)
* Facebook/Yelp XSS: [http://techcrunch.com/2010/05/11/yelp-security-hole-puts-facebook-user-data-at-risk-underscores-problems-with-instant-personalization/](http://techcrunch.com/2010/05/11/yelp-security-hole-puts-facebook-user-data-at-risk-underscores-problems-with-instant-personalization/)
* Similar attack on Facebook/Yelp the next day: [http://techcrunch.com/2010/05/11/another-security-hole-found-on-yelp-facebook-data-once-again-put-at-risk/](http://techcrunch.com/2010/05/11/another-security-hole-found-on-yelp-facebook-data-once-again-put-at-risk/)

## Handlebars and Rails
We'll use a gem called handlebars_assets to take handlebars templates from raw templates in `assets/javascripts/templates` to compiled template functions in your javascript.

Here's the handlebars_assets page: [https://github.com/leshill/handlebars_assets](https://github.com/leshill/handlebars_assets)

Gemfile:

```gem 'handlebars_assets'```

Application.js:

```
//= require handlebars.runtime
//= require_tree ./templates
```

Now any templates in the `app/assets/javascripts/templates` folder or any subfolders will be loaded in your app.

### Templating in Rails exercise

Let's go back to LinkCheckerAjax and set it up to be nicer and more 'Railsy'.  We'll install our new gem, set it up in application.js, and get rid of some strings of HTML.  If you didn't finish LinkChecker Ajax, just extract your inline handlebars template from earlier into a template file.

Commit message:

Modifying javascript xss notes to clarify exercises

JavascriptTemplates/javascript_templating_and_xss.md, after:

# Javascript Templating and XSS

## Objectives

* Identify XSS attacks
* Create a template in JS/HTML
* Create a templates in Rails/JS

## The XSS Attack
### What is XSS?
An XSS or Cross Site Scripting attack occurs when the attacker is able to insert custom strings into the page unfiltered.  In other words, the application developer mistakenly trusts some data as being safe to insert into the DOM.  
#### Trusting the query string
Let's look a simple XSS attack in query_string_xss.html.  
#### Trusting the database data
Let's look at a slightly more sophisticated attack in stored_data_xss/.  It's a Sinatra app so we'll have to start it up.

## Templates with Handlebars.js

We will be using handlebars as a templating system.  Read more about it at their website: [http://handlebarsjs.com/](http://handlebarsjs.com/)

It's a templating system analagous to ERB which has many of the same features.  Partials, conditionals, etc.

Handlebars templates can be brought into your javascript in three ways:

1. Write the templates inline in a script tag or other piece of the DOM.
2. Write the templates inline in a string.
2. Precompile the templates into javascript functions and include them via script tags.  In the context of Rails, a gem will do this for us automatically.  This is the best way.

To install the handlebars compiler at your shell:

`npm install handlebars@1.3 -g`

Then you can use it:

`handlebars <template>.handlebars -f <outputfile>.js`

Let's look at  query_string_fixed.html

#### Exercise

Take a look at [LinkCheckerAjax](https://github.com/wdi-sf-march-2014/LinkCheckerWithAJAX).  

__Step 1__: Try to understand what the code is doing.  The goal of the app is simply to check the http response code of a single site.  Look at the javascript and set break points in the browser.

__Step 2__: Try to figure out if there are any XSS vulnerabilities. Once you understand what the app is doing, fix it by adding handlebars templates inline in the javascript.

## Types of XSS
### Reflective
The attacker sends the victim to the application with an XSS attack in the victim's request.  The application reflects that XSS attack back to the victim, and the victim's browser executes it.
### Stored
The attacker inserts a payload into the application's database and the application replays it to the victim.
### Dom Based
The attacker modifies the DOM in a way that causes the application's javascript to go crazy and execute an attack.

## XSS in the Real World
* Through an Amazon book: [http://drwetter.eu/amazon/](http://drwetter.eu/amazon/)

   The book in question: [http://www.amazon.com/The-Web-Application-Hackers-Handbook/dp/1118026470](http://www.amazon.com/The-Web-Application-Hackers-Handbook/dp/1118026470)
* Facebook XSS through embedded rendered JS: [https://www.acunetix.com/websitesecurity/xss-facebook/](https://www.acunetix.com/websitesecurity/xss-facebook/)
* Facebook/Yelp XSS: [http://techcrunch.com/2010/05/11/yelp-security-hole-puts-facebook-user-data-at-risk-underscores-problems-with-instant-personalization/](http://techcrunch.com/2010/05/11/yelp-security-hole-puts-facebook-user-data-at-risk-underscores-problems-with-instant-personalization/)
* Similar attack on Facebook/Yelp the next day: [http://techcrunch.com/2010/05/11/another-security-hole-found-on-yelp-facebook-data-once-again-put-at-risk/](http://techcrunch.com/2010/05/11/another-security-hole-found-on-yelp-facebook-data-once-again-put-at-risk/)

## Handlebars and Rails
We'll use a gem called handlebars_assets to take handlebars templates from raw templates in `assets/javascripts/templates` to compiled template functions in your javascript.

Here's the handlebars_assets page: [https://github.com/leshill/handlebars_assets](https://github.com/leshill/handlebars_assets)

Gemfile:

```gem 'handlebars_assets'```

Application.js:

```
//= require handlebars.runtime
//= require_tree ./templates
```

Now any templates in the `app/assets/javascripts/templates` folder or any subfolders will be loaded in your app.

#### Exercise

Go back to [LinkCheckerAjax](https://github.com/wdi-sf-march-2014/LinkCheckerWithAJAX) and set it up to be nicer and more 'Railsy'.  Install the handlebars_assets gem, set it up in application.js, and get rid of some strings of HTML.
