# Angular Rails
## Intro to Angular Modules


| Objectives |
| :---  |
| Using multiple controllers in an application to separate different aspects of the application. (Think how rails doesn't shove everything in the `ApplicationController` class.)|
| Managing dependencies needed to successfully separate components into modular and versatile chunks.  |
| Students should be able to handle scoping with nested controllers.  |


## Outline

###What is a module?
You can think of a module as a container for the different parts of your app – controllers, services, filters, directives, etc.

###Why do we need modules?
- Most applications have a main method that instantiates and wires together the different parts of the application.

- Angular apps don't have a main method. Instead modules declaratively specify how an application should be bootstrapped. There are several advantages to this approach:

  1) The declarative process is easier to understand.
  2) You can package code as reusable modules.
  3) The modules can be loaded in any order (or even in parallel) because modules delay execution.
  4) Unit tests only have to load relevant modules, which keeps them fast.
  5) End-to-end tests can use modules to override configuration.

####When Should I Use A Module?
- There should be a module for each feature
- There should be a module for each reusable component (especially directives and filters)
- When an application level module which depends on the above modules and contains any initialization code

##Angular Services
- Angular services are substitutable objects that are wired together using dependency injection (DI). You can use services to organize and share code across your app.

Angular Services are:
  - Lazily instantiated -- only instantiates when an application component depends on it
  - Singletons - each component dependent on a service gets a reference to a single instance generated by the service factory

###How Do You Use Angular Services?
  - Need to 


* Multiple Controllers
  * Separate Controllers
  * Nesting Controllers
    * inheriting
    * overiding inherited attributes
* More Modular Angular
  * `angular.module`
    * An `App` module
    * Dependency injection
* Modular Controllers
  * A module for controllers
  * When to create a new module?
    * Feature Separation

  